Being open and FAIR in modeling infectious diseases for decision support

Mathematical models of infectious disease transmission have been influential tools in guiding public health interventions, including vaccination and treatment, as well as non-pharmaceutical interventions such as lockdowns and school closures to reduce transmission. While models played an important role in the response to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, weaknesses in how we build and utilize models became apparent that could compromise our ability to respond to the next pandemic. Firstly, model development was mostly reactive rather than proactive. Despite many years of model development for other infectious diseases, SARS-CoV-2 models were relatively slow to be developed relative to the short timescale over which decisions needed to be made. Secondly, while models were released models as open source code, they were not necessarily accessible, usable or adaptable, and so did not fully fulfil open science principles. Thirdly, mechanistic models often only consider a limited number of scenarios, and the relative tradeoffs and constraints on interventions do not form a part of an integrated model.

I will discuss the application of applied category theory (ACT) to modeling infectious diseases as a means of making complex models more understandable and easier to modify. ACT is a mathematical framework to describe complex systems in a structured and relational way, like a language for understanding how different parts of a system can fit together and interact. I will demonstrate how concepts in ACT map cleanly to concepts in compartmental models of infectious disease transmission. I will argue that such an approach may be preferable to trying to build a large library of different models, or a single monolithic model, in part through the way in which this approach facilitates 'showing your working', where the intermediate stages of building a complex model are made visible. I will also demonstrate the utility of generative artificial intelligence in interpreting and documenting models during the model development process, allowing others to check, understand, and modify models.

I will also discuss how models can be integrated with decision-making processes. As with building models of transmission dynamics, building a quantitative model makes the underlying assumptions, in terms of what is being optimized, the constraints on the system, are transparent. By treating interventions as a single, but extremely highly dimensional parameter allows us to consider many different policies rather than one taken from a small selection. Specific examples include policies optimized to 'flatten the curve' or to minimize the final size of the epidemic under constraints e.g. on the cost of the intervention. I will highlight some open algorithmic challenges, particularly in the context of stochastic models.
 
I will close by showing how the above approaches fit into a larger initiative to help models of infectious disease conform to FAIR principles of open science - Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reproducible, while increasing our capacity to perform real-time modeling. We can increase the impact of what we do, and ensure the re-use and extension of our work, making our models more relevant and useful.